A Blender 2.45 screenshot displaying the3D test model SuzanneSimulated flightover Trentavalley in theJulian AlpsComputer graphicsComputer graphics deals with generating images and artwith the aid of computers. Today, computer graphics is a coretechnology in digital photography, film, video games, digitalart, cell phone and computer displays, and many specializedapplications. A great deal of specialized hardware andsoftware has been developed, with the displays of mostdevices being driven by computer graphics hardware. It is avast and recently developed area of computer science. Thephrase was coined in 1960 by computer graphics researchersVerne Hudson and William Fetter of Boeing. It is oftenabbreviated as CG, or typically in the context of film ascomputer generated imagery (CGI). The non-artistic aspectsof computer graphics are the subject of computer scienceresearch.[1]Some topics in computer graphics include user interface design, sprite graphics, rendering, ray tracing,geometry processing, computer animation, vector graphics, 3D modeling, shaders, GPU design, implicitsurfaces, visualization, scientific computing, image processing, computational photography, scientificvisualization, computational geometry and computer vision, among others. The overall methodologydepends heavily on the underlying sciences of geometry, optics, physics, and perception.
Computer graphics is responsible for displaying art and image data effectively andmeaningfully to the consumer. It is also used for processing image data received fromthe physical world, such as photo and video content. Computer graphics developmenthas had a significant impact on many types of media and has revolutionizedanimation, movies, advertising, video games, in general.
The term computer graphics has been used in a broad sense to describe "almosteverything on computers that is not text or sound".[2] Typically, the term computergraphics refers to several different things:the representation and manipulation of image data by a computerthe various technologies used to create and manipulate imagesmethods for digitally synthesizing and manipulating visual content, see study of computergraphicsToday, computer graphics is widespread. Such imagery is found in and on television, newspapers, weatherreports, and in a variety of medical investigations and surgical procedures. A well-constructed graph canpresent complex statistics in a form that is easier to understand and interpret. In the media "such graphs areused to illustrate papers, reports, theses", and other presentation material.[3]OverviewSAGE Sector Control RoomMany tools have been developed to visualize data. Computer-generated imagery can be categorized intoseveral different types: two dimensional (2D), three dimensional (3D), and animated graphics. Astechnology has improved, 3D computer graphics have become more common, but 2D computer graphicsare still widely used. Computer graphics has emerged as a sub-field of computer science which studiesmethods for digitally synthesizing and manipulating visual content. Over the past decade, other specializedfields have been developed like information visualization, and scientific visualization more concerned with"the visualization of three dimensional phenomena (architectural, meteorological, medical, biological, etc.),where the emphasis is on realistic renderings of volumes, surfaces, illumination sources, and so forth,perhaps with a dynamic (time) component".[4]The precursor sciences to the development of modern computer graphics were the advances in electricalengineering, electronics, and television that took place during the first half of the twentieth century. Screenscould display art since the Lumiere brothers' use of mattes to create special effects for the earliest filmsdating from 1895, but such displays were limited and not interactive. The first cathode ray tube, the Brauntube, was invented in 1897 – it in turn would permit the oscilloscope and the military control panel – themore direct precursors of the field, as they provided the first two-dimensional electronic displays thatresponded to programmatic or user input. Nevertheless, computer graphics remained relatively unknown asa discipline until the 1950s and the post-World War II period – during which time the discipline emergedfrom a combination of both pure university and laboratory academic research into more advancedcomputers and the United States military's further development of technologies like radar, advancedaviation, and rocketry developed during the war. New kinds of displays were needed to process the wealthof information resulting from such projects, leading to the development of computer graphics as a discipline.
Early projects like the Whirlwind and SAGE Projects introducedthe CRT as a viable display and interaction interface and introducedthe light pen as an input device. Douglas T. Ross of the WhirlwindSAGE system performed a personal experiment in which he wrotea small program that captured the movement of his finger anddisplayed its vector (his traced name) on a display scope. One of thefirst interactive video games to feature recognizable, interactivegraphics – Tennis for Two – was created for an oscilloscope byWilliam Higinbotham to entertain visitors in 1958 at BrookhavenNational Laboratory and simulated a tennis match. In 1959,Douglas T. Ross innovated again while working at MIT ontransforming mathematic statements into computer generated 3Dmachine tool vectors by taking the opportunity to create a displayscope image of a Disney cartoon character.[5]Electronics pioneer Hewlett-Packard went public in 1957 afterincorporating the decade prior, and established strong ties withStanford University through its founders, who were alumni. Thisbegan the decades-long transformation of the southern San Francisco Bay Area into the world's leadingcomputer technology hub – now known as Silicon Valley. The field of computer graphics developed withthe emergence of computer graphics hardware.
History1950sSpacewar! running on the ComputerHistory Museum's PDP-1Further advances in computing led to greater advancements in interactive computer graphics. In 1959, theTX-2 computer was developed at MIT's Lincoln Laboratory. The TX-2 integrated a number of new man-machine interfaces. A light pen could be used to draw sketches on the computer using Ivan Sutherland'srevolutionary Sketchpad software.[6] Using a light pen, Sketchpad allowed one to draw simple shapes onthe computer screen, save them and even recall them later. The light pen itself had a small photoelectric cellin its tip. This cell emitted an electronic pulse whenever it was placed in front of a computer screen and thescreen's electron gun fired directly at it. By simply timing the electronic pulse with the current location ofthe electron gun, it was easy to pinpoint exactly where the pen was on the screen at any given moment.
Once that was determined, the computer could then draw a cursor at that location. Sutherland seemed tofind the perfect solution for many of the graphics problems he faced. Even today, many standards ofcomputer graphics interfaces got their start with this early Sketchpad program. One example of this is indrawing constraints. If one wants to draw a square for example, they do not have to worry about drawingfour lines perfectly to form the edges of the box. One can simply specify that they want to draw a box, andthen specify the location and size of the box. The software will then construct a perfect box, with the rightdimensions and at the right location. Another example is that Sutherland's software modeled objects – notjust a picture of objects. In other words, with a model of a car, one could change the size of the tires withoutaffecting the rest of the car. It could stretch the body of car without deforming the tires.
The phrase "computer graphics" has been credited to WilliamFetter, a graphic designer for Boeing in 1960. Fetter in turnattributed it to Verne Hudson, also at Boeing.[6][7]In 1961 another student at MIT, Steve Russell, created anotherimportant title in the history of video games, Spacewar! Written forthe DEC PDP-1, Spacewar was an instant success and copiesstarted flowing to other PDP-1 owners and eventually DEC got acopy. The engineers at DEC used it as a diagnostic program onevery new PDP-1 before shipping it. The sales force picked up onthis quickly enough and when installing new units, would run the"world's first video game" for their new customers.
(Higginbotham's Tennis For Two had beaten Spacewar by almost three years, but it was almost unknownoutside of a research or academic setting.)At around the same time (1961–1962) in the University of Cambridge, Elizabeth Waldram wrote code todisplay radio-astronomy maps on a cathode ray tube.[8]E. E. Zajac, a scientist at Bell Telephone Laboratory (BTL), created a film called "Simulation of a two-girogravity attitude control system" in 1963.[9] In this computer-generated film, Zajac showed how the attitudeof a satellite could be altered as it orbits the Earth. He created the animation on an IBM 7090 mainframecomputer. Also at BTL, Ken Knowlton, Frank Sinden, Ruth A. Weiss and Michael Noll started working inthe computer graphics field. Sinden created a film called Force, Mass and Motion (http://techchannel.att.com/play-video.cfm/2012/8/20/AT&T-Archives-Force-Mass-Motion) illustrating Newton's laws of motion inoperation. Around the same time, other scientists were creating computer graphics to illustrate their research.
At Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Nelson Max created the films Flow of a Viscous Fluid and Propagationof Shock Waves in a Solid Form. Boeing Aircraft created a film called Vibration of an Aircraft.
Also sometime in the early 1960s, automobiles would also provide a boost through the early work of PierreBézier at Renault, who used Paul de Casteljau's curves – now called Bézier curves after Bézier's work inthe field – to develop 3d modeling techniques for Renault car bodies. These curves would form the1960sPong arcade versionfoundation for much curve-modeling work in the field, as curves – unlike polygons – are mathematicallycomplex entities to draw and model well.
It was not long before major corporations started taking an interest incomputer graphics. TRW, Lockheed-Georgia, General Electric and SperryRand are among the many companies that were getting started in computergraphics by the mid-1960s. IBM was quick to respond to this interest byreleasing the IBM 2250 graphics terminal, the first commercially availablegraphics computer. Ralph Baer, a supervising engineer at SandersAssociates, came up with a home video game in 1966 that was laterlicensed to Magnavox and called the Odyssey. While very simplistic, andrequiring fairly inexpensive electronic parts, it allowed the player to movepoints of light around on a screen. It was the first consumer computergraphics product. David C. Evans was director of engineering at Bendix Corporation's computer divisionfrom 1953 to 1962, after which he worked for the next five years as a visiting professor at Berkeley. Therehe continued his interest in computers and how they interfaced with people. In 1966, the University of Utahrecruited Evans to form a computer science program, and computer graphics quickly became his primaryinterest. This new department would become the world's primary research center for computer graphicsthrough the 1970s.
Also, in 1966, Ivan Sutherland continued to innovate at MIT when he invented the first computer-controlled head-mounted display (HMD). It displayed two separate wireframe images, one for each eye.
This allowed the viewer to see the computer scene in stereoscopic 3D. The heavy hardware required forsupporting the display and tracker was called the Sword of Damocles because of the potential danger if itwere to fall upon the wearer. After receiving his Ph.D. from MIT, Sutherland became Director ofInformation Processing at ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency), and later became a professor atHarvard. In 1967 Sutherland was recruited by Evans to join the computer science program at the Universityof Utah – a development which would turn that department into one of the most important research centersin graphics for nearly a decade thereafter, eventually producing some of the most important pioneers in thefield. There Sutherland perfected his HMD; twenty years later, NASA would re-discover his techniques intheir virtual reality research. At Utah, Sutherland and Evans were highly sought after consultants by largecompanies, but they were frustrated at the lack of graphics hardware available at the time, so they startedformulating a plan to start their own company.
In 1968, Dave Evans and Ivan Sutherland founded the first computer graphics hardware company, Evans &Sutherland. While Sutherland originally wanted the company to be located in Cambridge, Massachusetts,Salt Lake City was instead chosen due to its proximity to the professors' research group at the University ofUtah.
Also in 1968 Arthur Appel described the first ray casting algorithm, the first of a class of ray tracing-basedrendering algorithms that have since become fundamental in achieving photorealism in graphics bymodeling the paths that rays of light take from a light source, to surfaces in a scene, and into the camera.
In 1969, the ACM initiated A Special Interest Group on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) which organizesconferences, graphics standards, and publications within the field of computer graphics. By 1973, the firstannual SIGGRAPH conference was held, which has become one of the focuses of the organization.
SIGGRAPH has grown in size and importance as the field of computer graphics has expanded over time.
1970sThe Utah teapot by Martin Newell and itsstatic renders became emblematic of CGIdevelopment during the 1970s.
Subsequently, a number of breakthroughs in the field –particularly important early breakthroughs in the transformationof graphics from utilitarian to realistic – occurred at theUniversity of Utah in the 1970s, which had hired IvanSutherland. He was paired with David C. Evans to teach anadvanced computer graphics class, which contributed a greatdeal of founding research to the field and taught severalstudents who would grow to found several of the industry'smost important companies – namely Pixar, Silicon Graphics,and Adobe Systems. Tom Stockham led the image processinggroup at UU which worked closely with the computer graphicslab.
One of these students was Edwin Catmull. Catmull had justcome from The Boeing Company and had been working onhis degree in physics. Growing up on Disney, Catmull lovedanimation yet quickly discovered that he did not have the talent for drawing. Now Catmull (along withmany others) saw computers as the natural progression of animation and they wanted to be part of therevolution. The first computer animation that Catmull saw was his own. He created an animation of hishand opening and closing. He also pioneered texture mapping to paint textures on three-dimensional modelsin 1974, now considered one of the fundamental techniques in 3D modeling. It became one of his goals toproduce a feature-length motion picture using computer graphics – a goal he would achieve two decadeslater after his founding role in Pixar. In the same class, Fred Parke created an animation of his wife's face.
The two animations were included in the 1976 feature film Futureworld.
As the UU computer graphics laboratory was attracting people from all over, John Warnock was another ofthose early pioneers; he later founded Adobe Systems and create a revolution in the publishing world withhis PostScript page description language, and Adobe would go on later to create the industry standard photoediting software in Adobe Photoshop and a prominent movie industry special effects program in AdobeAfter Effects.
James Clark was also there; he later founded Silicon Graphics, a maker of advanced rendering systems thatwould dominate the field of high-end graphics until the early 1990s.
A major advance in 3D computer graphics was created at UU by these early pioneers – hidden surfacedetermination. In order to draw a representation of a 3D object on the screen, the computer must determinewhich surfaces are "behind" the object from the viewer's perspective, and thus should be "hidden" whenthe computer creates (or renders) the image. The 3D Core Graphics System (or Core) was the firstgraphical standard to be developed. A group of 25 experts of the ACM Special Interest Group SIGGRAPHdeveloped this "conceptual framework". The specifications were published in 1977, and it became afoundation for many future developments in the field.
Also in the 1970s, Henri Gouraud, Jim Blinn and Bui Tuong Phong contributed to the foundations ofshading in CGI via the development of the Gouraud shading and Blinn–Phong shading models, allowinggraphics to move beyond a "flat" look to a look more accurately portraying depth. Jim Blinn also innovatedfurther in 1978 by introducing bump mapping, a technique for simulating uneven surfaces, and thepredecessor to many more advanced kinds of mapping used today.
The modern videogame arcade as is known today was birthed in the 1970s, with the first arcade gamesusing real-time 2D sprite graphics. Pong in 1972 was one of the first hit arcade cabinet games. Speed Racein 1974 featured sprites moving along a vertically scrolling road. Gun Fight in 1975 featured human-Donkey Kong was one ofthe video games that helpedto popularize computergraphics to a massaudience in the 1980s.
looking animated characters, while Space Invaders in 1978 featured a large number of animated figures onscreen; both used a specialized barrel shifter circuit made from discrete chips to help their Intel 8080microprocessor animate their framebuffer graphics.
The 1980s began to see the modernization and commercialization ofcomputer graphics. As the home computer proliferated, a subject which hadpreviously been an academics-only discipline was adopted by a much largeraudience, and the number of computer graphics developers increasedsignificantly.
In the early 1980s, metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) very-large-scaleintegration (VLSI) technology led to the availability of 16-bit centralprocessing unit (CPU) microprocessors and the first graphics processingunit (GPU) chips, which began to revolutionize computer graphics,enabling high-resolution graphics for computer graphics terminals as well aspersonal computer (PC) systems. NEC's µPD7220 was the first GPU,fabricated on a fully integrated NMOS VLSI chip. It supported up to1024x1024 resolution, and laid the foundations for the emerging PCgraphics market. It was used in a number of graphics cards, and waslicensed for clones such as the Intel 82720, the first of Intel's graphicsprocessing units.[10] MOS memory also became cheaper in the early 1980s,enabling the development of affordable framebuffer memory,[11] notablyvideo RAM (VRAM) introduced by Texas Instruments (TI) in the mid-1980s.[12] In 1984, Hitachi released the ARTC HD63484, the firstcomplementary MOS (CMOS) GPU. It was capable of displaying high-resolution in color mode and up to 4K resolution in monochrome mode,and it was used in a number of graphics cards and terminals during the late1980s.[13] In 1986, TI introduced the TMS34010, the first fullyprogrammable MOS graphics processor.[12]Computer graphics terminals during this decade became increasingly intelligent, semi-standalone andstandalone workstations. Graphics and application processing were increasingly migrated to the intelligencein the workstation, rather than continuing to rely on central mainframe and mini-computers. Typical of theearly move to high-resolution computer graphics intelligent workstations for the computer-aidedengineering market were the Orca 1000, 2000 and 3000 workstations, developed by Orcatech of Ottawa, aspin-off from Bell-Northern Research, and led by David Pearson, an early workstation pioneer. The Orca3000 was based on the 16-bit Motorola 68000 microprocessor and AMD bit-slice processors, and had Unixas its operating system. It was targeted squarely at the sophisticated end of the design engineering sector.
Artists and graphic designers began to see the personal computer, particularly the Commodore Amiga andMacintosh, as a serious design tool, one that could save time and draw more accurately than other methods.
The Macintosh remains a highly popular tool for computer graphics among graphic design studios andbusinesses. Modern computers, dating from the 1980s, often use graphical user interfaces (GUI) to presentdata and information with symbols, icons and pictures, rather than text. Graphics are one of the five keyelements of multimedia technology.
In the field of realistic rendering, Japan's Osaka University developed the LINKS-1 Computer GraphicsSystem, a supercomputer that used up to 257 Zilog Z8001 microprocessors, in 1982, for the purpose ofrendering realistic 3D computer graphics. According to the Information Processing Society of Japan: "Thecore of 3D image rendering is calculating the luminance of each pixel making up a rendered surface from1980sthe given viewpoint, light source, and object position. The LINKS-1 system was developed to realize animage rendering methodology in which each pixel could be parallel processed independently using raytracing. By developing a new software methodology specifically for high-speed image rendering, LINKS-1was able to rapidly render highly realistic images. It was used to create the world's first 3D planetarium-likevideo of the entire heavens that was made completely with computer graphics. The video was presented atthe Fujitsu pavilion at the 1985 International Exposition in Tsukuba."[14] The LINKS-1 was the world'smost powerful computer, as of 1984.[15] Also in the field of realistic rendering, the general renderingequation of David Immel and James Kajiya was developed in 1986 – an important step towardsimplementing global illumination, which is necessary to pursue photorealism in computer graphics.
The continuing popularity of Star Wars and other science fiction franchises were relevant in cinematic CGIat this time, as Lucasfilm and Industrial Light & Magic became known as the "go-to" house by many otherstudios for topnotch computer graphics in film. Important advances in chroma keying ("bluescreening",etc.) were made for the later films of the original trilogy. Two other pieces of video would also outlast theera as historically relevant: Dire Straits' iconic, near-fully-CGI video for their song "Money for Nothing" in1985, which popularized CGI among music fans of that era, and a scene from Young Sherlock Holmes thesame year featuring the first fully CGI character in a feature movie (an animated stained-glass knight). In1988, the first shaders – small programs designed specifically to do shading as a separate algorithm – weredeveloped by Pixar, which had already spun off from Industrial Light & Magic as a separate entity – thoughthe public would not see the results of such technological progress until the next decade. In the late 1980s,Silicon Graphics (SGI) computers were used to create some of the first fully computer-generated short filmsat Pixar, and Silicon Graphics machines were considered a high-water mark for the field during the decade.
The 1980s is also called the golden era of videogames; millions-selling systems from Atari, Nintendo andSega, among other companies, exposed computer graphics for the first time to a new, young, andimpressionable audience – as did MS-DOS-based personal computers, Apple IIs, Macs, and Amigas, all ofwhich also allowed users to program their own games if skilled enough. For the arcades, advances weremade in commercial, real-time 3D graphics. In 1988, the first dedicated real-time 3D graphics boards wereintroduced for arcades, with the Namco System 21[16] and Taito Air System.[17] On the professional side,Evans & Sutherland and SGI developed 3D raster graphics hardware that directly influenced the latersingle-chip graphics processing unit (GPU), a technology where a separate and very powerful chip is usedin parallel processing with a CPU to optimize graphics.
The decade also saw computer graphics applied to many additional professional markets, includinglocation-based entertainment and education with the E&S Digistar, vehicle design, vehicle simulation, andchemistry.
The 1990s' overwhelming note was the emergence of 3D modeling on a mass scale and an impressive risein the quality of CGI generally. Home computers became able to take on rendering tasks that previously hadbeen limited to workstations costing thousands of dollars; as 3D modelers became available for homesystems, the popularity of Silicon Graphics workstations declined and powerful Microsoft Windows andApple Macintosh machines running Autodesk products like 3D Studio or other home rendering softwareascended in importance. By the end of the decade, the GPU would begin its rise to the prominence it stillenjoys today.
The field began to see the first rendered graphics that could truly pass as photorealistic to the untrained eye(though they could not yet do so with a trained CGI artist) and 3D graphics became far more popular ingaming, multimedia, and animation. At the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the nineties were created,1990sQuarxs, series poster,Maurice Benayoun, FrançoisSchuiten, 1992in France, the very first computer graphics TV series: La Vie des bêtes bystudio Mac Guff Ligne (1988), Les Fables Géométriques (1989–1991) bystudio Fantôme, and Quarxs, the first HDTV computer graphics series byMaurice Benayoun and François Schuiten (studio Z-A production, 1990–1993).
In film, Pixar began its serious commercial rise in this era under EdwinCatmull, with its first major film release, in 1995 – Toy Story – a criticaland commercial success of nine-figure magnitude. The studio to invent theprogrammable shader would go on to have many animated hits, and itswork on prerendered video animation is still considered an industry leaderand research trail breaker.
In video games, in 1992, Virtua Racing, running on the Sega Model 1arcade system board, laid the foundations for fully 3D racing games andpopularized real-time 3D polygonal graphics among a wider audience inthe video game industry.[18] The Sega Model 2 in 1993 and Sega Model 3in 1996 subsequently pushed the boundaries of commercial, real-time 3Dgraphics. Back on the PC, Wolfenstein 3D, Doom and Quake, three of the first massively popular 3D first-person shooter games, were released by id Software to critical and popular acclaim during this decade usinga rendering engine innovated primarily by John Carmack. The Sony PlayStation, Sega Saturn, andNintendo 64, among other consoles, sold in the millions and popularized 3D graphics for home gamers.
Certain late-1990s first-generation 3D titles became seen as influential in popularizing 3D graphics amongconsole users, such as platform games Super Mario 64 and The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, andearly 3D fighting games like Virtua Fighter, Battle Arena Toshinden, and Tekken.
Technology and algorithms for rendering continued to improve greatly. In 1996, Krishnamurty and Levoyinvented normal mapping – an improvement on Jim Blinn's bump mapping. 1999 saw Nvidia release theseminal GeForce 256, the first home video card billed as a graphics processing unit or GPU, which in itsown words contained "integrated transform, lighting, triangle setup/clipping, and rendering engines". Bythe end of the decade, computers adopted common frameworks for graphics processing such as DirectXand OpenGL. Since then, computer graphics have only become more detailed and realistic, due to morepowerful graphics hardware and 3D modeling software. AMD also became a leading developer of graphicsboards in this decade, creating a "duopoly" in the field which exists this day.
CGI became ubiquitous in earnest during this era. Video games and CGI cinema had spread the reach ofcomputer graphics to the mainstream by the late 1990s and continued to do so at an accelerated pace in the2000s. CGI was also adopted en masse for television advertisements widely in the late 1990s and 2000s,and so became familiar to a massive audience.
The continued rise and increasing sophistication of the graphics processing unit were crucial to this decade,and 3D rendering capabilities became a standard feature as 3D-graphics GPUs became considered anecessity for desktop computer makers to offer. The Nvidia GeForce line of graphics cards dominated themarket in the early decade with occasional significant competing presence from ATI.[19] As the decadeprogressed, even low-end machines usually contained a 3D-capable GPU of some kind as Nvidia andAMD both introduced low-priced chipsets and continued to dominate the market. Shaders which had beenintroduced in the 1980s to perform specialized processing on the GPU would by the end of the decadebecome supported on most consumer hardware, speeding up graphics considerably and allowing for greatlyimproved texture and shading in computer graphics via the widespread adoption of normal mapping, bumpmapping, and a variety of other techniques allowing the simulation of a great amount of detail.
2000sA screenshot from the videogame KillingFloor, built in Unreal Engine 2. Personalcomputers and console video games took agreat graphical leap forward in the 2000s,becoming able to display graphics in realtime computing that had previously onlybeen possible pre-rendered and/or onbusiness-level hardware.
A diamond plate texture renderedclose-up using physically basedrendering principles – increasingly anactive area of research for computergraphics in the 2010sComputer graphics used in films and video games graduallybegan to be realistic to the point of entering the uncannyvalley. CGI movies proliferated, with traditional animatedcartoon films like Ice Age and Madagascar as well asnumerous Pixar offerings like Finding Nemo dominating thebox office in this field. The Final Fantasy: The SpiritsWithin, released in 2001, was the first fully computer-generated feature film to use photorealistic CGI charactersand be fully made with motion capture.[20] The film was nota box-office success, however.[21] Some commentators havesuggested this may be partly because the lead CGI charactershad facial features which fell into the "uncannyvalley".[note 1] Other animated films like The Polar Expressdrew attention at this time as well. Star Wars also resurfacedwith its prequel trilogy and the effects continued to set a barfor CGI in film.
In videogames, the Sony PlayStation 2 and 3, the MicrosoftXbox line of consoles, and offerings from Nintendo such asthe GameCube maintained a large following, as did the Windows PC. Marquee CGI-heavy titles like theseries of Grand Theft Auto, Assassin's Creed, Final Fantasy, BioShock, Kingdom Hearts, Mirror's Edgeand dozens of others continued to approach photorealism, grow the video game industry and impress, untilthat industry's revenues became comparable to those of movies. Microsoft made a decision to exposeDirectX more easily to the independent developer world with the XNA program, but it was not a success.
DirectX itself remained a commercial success, however. OpenGL continued to mature as well, and it andDirectX improved greatly; the second-generation shader languages HLSL and GLSL began to be popularin this decade.
In scientific computing, the GPGPU technique to pass large amounts of data bidirectionally between a GPUand CPU was invented; speeding up analysis on many kinds of bioinformatics and molecular biologyexperiments. The technique has also been used for Bitcoin mining and has applications in computer vision.
In the 2010s, CGI has been nearly ubiquitous in video, pre-rendered graphics are nearly scientifically photorealistic, and real-time graphics on a suitably high-end system may simulatephotorealism to the untrained eye.
Texture mapping has matured into a multistage process with manylayers; generally, it is not uncommon to implement texture mapping,bump mapping or isosurfaces or normal mapping, lighting mapsincluding specular highlights and reflection techniques, and shadowvolumes into one rendering engine using shaders, which arematuring considerably. Shaders are now very nearly a necessity foradvanced work in the field, providing considerable complexity inmanipulating pixels, vertices, and textures on a per-element basis,and countless possible effects. Their shader languages HLSL andGLSL are active fields of research and development. Physicallybased rendering or PBR, which implements many maps andperforms advanced calculation to simulate real optic light flow, is an2010sRaster graphicsprites (left) andmasks (right)active research area as well, along with advanced areas like ambient occlusion, subsurface scattering,Rayleigh scattering, photon mapping, and many others. Experiments into the processing power required toprovide graphics in real time at ultra-high-resolution modes like 4K Ultra HD are beginning, though beyondreach of all but the highest-end hardware.
In cinema, most animated movies are CGI now; a great many animated CGI films are made per year, butfew, if any, attempt photorealism due to continuing fears of the uncanny valley. Most are 3D cartoons.
In videogames, the Microsoft Xbox One, Sony PlayStation 4, and Nintendo Switch currently dominate thehome space and are all capable of highly advanced 3D graphics; the Windows PC is still one of the mostactive gaming platforms as well.
2D computer graphics are the computer-based generation of digital images—mostlyfrom models, such as digital image, and by techniques specific to them.
2D computer graphics are mainly used in applications that were originally developedupon traditional printing and drawing technologies such as typography. In thoseapplications, the two-dimensional image is not just a representation of a real-worldobject, but an independent artifact with added semantic value; two-dimensional modelsare therefore preferred because they give more direct control of the image than 3Dcomputer graphics, whose approach is more akin to photography than to typography.
A large form of digital art, pixel art is created through the use of raster graphics software, where images areedited on the pixel level. Graphics in most old (or relatively limited) computer and video games, graphingcalculator games, and many mobile phone games are mostly pixel art.
A sprite is a two-dimensional image or animation that is integrated into a larger scene. Initially including justgraphical objects handled separately from the memory bitmap of a video display, this now includes variousmanners of graphical overlays.
Originally, sprites were a method of integrating unrelated bitmaps so that they appeared to be part of thenormal bitmap on a screen, such as creating an animated character that can be moved on a screen withoutaltering the data defining the overall screen. Such sprites can be created by either electronic circuitry orsoftware. In circuitry, a hardware sprite is a hardware construct that employs custom DMA channels tointegrate visual elements with the main screen in that it super-imposes two discrete video sources. Softwarecan simulate this through specialized rendering methods.
Image typesTwo-dimensionalPixel artSprite graphicsVector graphicsExample showing effect of vectorgraphics versus raster (bitmap)graphicsStable Diffusion output for theprompt "an astronaut riding ahorse, by Hiroshige", 2022Vector graphics formats are complementary to raster graphics. Rastergraphics is the representation of images as an array of pixels and istypically used for the representation of photographic images.[22] Vectorgraphics consists in encoding information about shapes and colors thatcomprise the image, which can allow for more flexibility in rendering.
There are instances when working with vector tools and formats is bestpractice, and instances when working with raster tools and formats isbest practice. There are times when both formats come together. Anunderstanding of the advantages and limitations of each technologyand the relationship between them is most likely to result in efficientand effective use of tools.
Since the mid-2010s, as a result of advances in deep neural networks,models have been created which take as input a natural languagedescription and produces as output an image matching that description.
Text-to-image models generally combine a language model, whichtransforms the input text into a latent representation, and a generativeimage model, which produces an image conditioned on thatrepresentation. The most effective models have generally been trainedon massive amounts of image and text data scraped from the web. By2022, the best of these models, for example Dall-E 2 and StableDiffusion, are able to create images in a range of styles, ranging fromimitations of living artists to near-photorealistic, in a matter of seconds,given powerful enough hardware.[23]3D graphics, compared to 2D graphics, are graphics that use a three-dimensional representation ofgeometric data. For the purpose of performance, this is stored in the computer. This includes images thatmay be for later display or for real-time viewing.
Despite these differences, 3D computer graphics rely on similar algorithms as 2D computer graphics do inthe frame and raster graphics (like in 2D) in the final rendered display. In computer graphics software, thedistinction between 2D and 3D is occasionally blurred; 2D applications may use 3D techniques to achieveeffects such as lighting, and primarily 3D may use 2D rendering techniques.
3D computer graphics are the same as 3D models. The model is contained within the graphical data file,apart from the rendering. However, there are differences that include the 3D model is the representation ofany 3D object. Until visually displayed a model is not graphic. Due to printing, 3D models are not onlyconfined to virtual space. 3D rendering is how a model can be displayed. Also can be used in non-graphicalcomputer simulations and calculations.
Computer animation is the art of creating moving images via the use of computers. It is a subfield ofcomputer graphics and animation. Increasingly it is created by means of 3D computer graphics, though 2Dcomputer graphics are still widely used for stylistic, low bandwidth, and faster real-time rendering needs.
Generative machine-learning modelsThree-dimensionalComputer animationExample of Computer animationproduced using Motion captureFractal landscape, an example ofcomputer-generated imageryIn the enlarged portion of the imageindividual pixels are rendered assquares and can be easily seen.
Sometimes the target of the animation is the computer itself, butsometimes the target is another medium, such as film. It is alsoreferred to as CGI (Computer-generated imagery or computer-generated imaging), especially when used in films.
Virtual entities may contain and be controlled by assorted attributes,such as transform values (location, orientation, and scale) stored inan object's transformation matrix. Animation is the change of anattribute over time. Multiple methods of achieving animation exist;the rudimentary form is based on the creation and editing ofkeyframes, each storing a value at a given time, per attribute to beanimated. The 2D/3D graphics software will change with eachkeyframe, creating an editable curve of a value mapped over time,in which results in animation. Other methods of animation includeprocedural and expression-based techniques: the formerconsolidates related elements of animated entities into sets ofattributes, useful for creating particle effects and crowd simulations;the latter allows an evaluated result returned from a user-definedlogical expression, coupled with mathematics, to automateanimation in a predictable way (convenient for controlling bonebehavior beyond what a hierarchy offers in skeletal system set up).
To create the illusion of movement, an image is displayed on thecomputer screen then quickly replaced by a new image that issimilar to the previous image, but shifted slightly. This technique isidentical to the illusion of movement in television and motion pictures.
Images are typically created by devices such as cameras, mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes, etc.
Digital images include both vector images and raster images, but raster images are more commonly used.
In digital imaging, a pixel (or picture element[24]) is a single point ina raster image. Pixels are placed on a regular 2-dimensional grid,and are often represented using dots or squares. Each pixel is asample of an original image, where more samples typically providea more accurate representation of the original. The intensity of eachpixel is variable; in color systems, each pixel has typically threecomponents such as red, green, and blue.
Graphics are visual presentations on a surface, such as a computerscreen. Examples are photographs, drawing, graphics designs,maps, engineering drawings, or other images. Graphics often combine text and illustration. Graphic designmay consist of the deliberate selection, creation, or arrangement of typography alone, as in a brochure, flier,Concepts and principlesPixelExample of shadingposter, web site, or book without any other element. Clarity or effective communication may be theobjective, association with other cultural elements may be sought, or merely, the creation of a distinctivestyle.
Primitives are basic units which a graphics system may combine to create more complex images or models.
Examples would be sprites and character maps in 2D video games, geometric primitives in CAD, orpolygons or triangles in 3D rendering. Primitives may be supported in hardware for efficient rendering, orthe building blocks provided by a graphics application.
Rendering is the generation of a 2D image from a 3D model by means of computer programs. A scene filecontains objects in a strictly defined language or data structure; it would contain geometry, viewpoint,texture, lighting, and shading information as a description of the virtual scene.[25] The data contained in thescene file is then passed to a rendering program to be processed and output to a digital image or rastergraphics image file. The rendering program is usually built into the computer graphics software, thoughothers are available as plug-ins or entirely separate programs. The term "rendering" may be by analogy withan "artist's rendering" of a scene. Although the technical details of rendering methods vary, the generalchallenges to overcome in producing a 2D image from a 3D representation stored in a scene file areoutlined as the graphics pipeline along a rendering device, such as a GPU. A GPU is a device able to assistthe CPU in calculations. If a scene is to look relatively realistic and predictable under virtual lighting, therendering software should solve the rendering equation. The rendering equation does not account for alllighting phenomena, but is a general lighting model for computer-generated imagery. 'Rendering' is alsoused to describe the process of calculating effects in a video editing file to produce final video output.
3D projection3D projection is a method of mapping three dimensional points to a two dimensionalplane. As most current methods for displaying graphical data are based on planar twodimensional media, the use of this type of projection is widespread. This method is used inmost real-time 3D applications and typically uses rasterization to produce the final image.
Ray tracingRay tracing is a technique from the family of image order algorithms for generating animage by tracing the path of light through pixels in an image plane. The technique iscapable of producing a high degree of photorealism; usually higher than that of typicalscanline rendering methods, but at a greater computational cost.
ShadingShading refers to depicting depth in 3D models orillustrations by varying levels of darkness. It is aprocess used in drawing for depicting levels ofdarkness on paper by applying media more densely orwith a darker shade for darker areas, and less denselyor with a lighter shade for lighter areas. There arevarious techniques of shading including cross hatchingwhere perpendicular lines of varying closeness aredrawn in a grid pattern to shade an area. The closerthe lines are together, the darker the area appears.
PrimitivesRenderingVolume rendered CT scan of aforearm with different colourschemes for muscle, fat, bone, andbloodLikewise, the farther apart the lines are, the lighter the area appears. The term has beenrecently generalized to mean that shaders are applied.
Texture mappingTexture mapping is a method for adding detail, surface texture, or colour to a computer-generated graphic or 3D model. Its application to 3D graphics was pioneered by Dr EdwinCatmull in 1974. A texture map is applied (mapped) to the surface of a shape, or polygon.
This process is akin to applying patterned paper to a plain white box. Multitexturing is theuse of more than one texture at a time on a polygon.[26] Procedural textures (created fromadjusting parameters of an underlying algorithm that produces an output texture), andbitmap textures (created in an image editing application or imported from a digital camera)are, generally speaking, common methods of implementing texture definition on 3Dmodels in computer graphics software, while intended placement of textures onto amodel's surface often requires a technique known as UV mapping (arbitrary, manual layoutof texture coordinates) for polygon surfaces, while non-uniform rational B-spline (NURB)surfaces have their own intrinsic parameterization used as texture coordinates. Texturemapping as a discipline also encompasses techniques for creating normal maps andbump maps that correspond to a texture to simulate height and specular maps to helpsimulate shine and light reflections, as well as environment mapping to simulate mirror-likereflectivity, also called gloss.
Anti-aliasingRendering resolution-independent entities (such as 3D models) for viewing on a raster(pixel-based) device such as a liquid-crystal display or CRT television inevitably causesaliasing artifacts mostly along geometric edges and the boundaries of texture details; theseartifacts are informally called "jaggies". Anti-aliasing methods rectify such problems,resulting in imagery more pleasing to the viewer, but can be somewhat computationallyexpensive. Various anti-aliasing algorithms (such as supersampling) are able to beemployed, then customized for the most efficient rendering performance versus quality ofthe resultant imagery; a graphics artist should consider this trade-off if anti-aliasingmethods are to be used. A pre-anti-aliased bitmap texture being displayed on a screen (orscreen location) at a resolution different than the resolution of the texture itself (such as atextured model in the distance from the virtual camera) will exhibit aliasing artifacts, whileany procedurally defined texture will always show aliasing artifacts as they are resolution-independent; techniques such as mipmapping and texture filtering help to solve texture-related aliasing problems.
Volume rendering is a technique used to display a 2D projection ofa 3D discretely sampled data set. A typical 3D data set is a group of2D slice images acquired by a CT or MRI scanner.
Usually these are acquired in a regular pattern (e.g., one slice everymillimeter) and usually have a regular number of image pixels in aregular pattern. This is an example of a regular volumetric grid,with each volume element, or voxel represented by a single valuethat is obtained by sampling the immediate area surrounding thevoxel.
Volume rendering3D modelingA modern render of the Utah teapot,an iconic model in 3D computergraphics created by Martin Newell,19753D modeling is the process of developing a mathematical, wireframe representation of any three-dimensional object, called a "3D model", via specialized software. Models may be created automatically ormanually; the manual modeling process of preparing geometric data for 3D computer graphics is similar toplastic arts such as sculpting. 3D models may be created using multiple approaches: use of NURBs togenerate accurate and smooth surface patches, polygonal mesh modeling (manipulation of facetedgeometry), or polygonal mesh subdivision (advanced tessellation of polygons, resulting in smooth surfacessimilar to NURB models). A 3D model can be displayed as a two-dimensional image through a processcalled 3D rendering, used in a computer simulation of physical phenomena, or animated directly for otherpurposes. The model can also be physically created using 3D Printing devices.
Charles CsuriCharles Csuri is a pioneer in computer animation and digital fine art and created the firstcomputer art in 1964. Csuri was recognized by Smithsonian as the father of digital art andcomputer animation, and as a pioneer of computer animation by the Museum of Modern Art(MoMA) and Association for Computing Machinery-SIGGRAPH.
Donald P. GreenbergDonald P. Greenberg is a leading innovator in computer graphics. Greenberg has authoredhundreds of articles and served as a teacher and mentor to many prominent computergraphic artists, animators, and researchers such as Robert L. Cook, Marc Levoy, Brian A.
Barsky, and Wayne Lytle. Many of his former students have won Academy Awards fortechnical achievements and several have won the SIGGRAPH Achievement Award.
Greenberg was the founding director of the NSF Center for Computer Graphics andScientific Visualization.
A. Michael NollNoll was one of the first researchers to use a digital computer to create artistic patterns andto formalize the use of random processes in the creation of visual arts. He began creatingdigital art in 1962, making him one of the earliest digital artists. In 1965, Noll along withFrieder Nake and Georg Nees were the first to publicly exhibit their computer art. DuringApril 1965, the Howard Wise Gallery exhibited Noll's computer art along with random-dotpatterns by Bela Julesz.
Pierre BézierJim BlinnJack BresenhamJohn CarmackPaul de CasteljauEd CatmullFrank CrowJames D. FoleyWilliam FetterHenry FuchsHenri GouraudMarek HolynskiCharles LoopPioneers in computer graphicsOther pioneersNadia Magnenat ThalmannBenoit MandelbrotMartin NewellFred ParkeBui Tuong PhongSteve RussellDaniel J. SandinAlvy Ray SmithBob SproullIvan SutherlandDaniel ThalmannAndries van DamJohn WarnockJ. Turner WhittedLance WilliamsJim KajiyaSIGGRAPHGDCBell Telephone LaboratoriesUnited States Armed Forces, particularly the Whirlwind computer and SAGE ProjectBoeingEurographicsIBMRenaultThe computer science department of the University of UtahLucasfilm and Industrial Light & MagicAutodeskAdobe SystemsPixarSilicon Graphics, Khronos Group & OpenGLThe DirectX division at MicrosoftNvidiaAMDThe study of computer graphics is a sub-field of computer science which studies methods for digitallysynthesizing and manipulating visual content. Although the term often refers to three-dimensional computergraphics, it also encompasses two-dimensional graphics and image processing.
As an academic discipline, computer graphics studies the manipulation of visual and geometric informationusing computational techniques. It focuses on the mathematical and computational foundations of imagegeneration and processing rather than purely aesthetic issues. Computer graphics is often differentiated fromOrganizationsStudy of computer graphicsthe field of visualization, although the two fields have many similarities.
Computer graphics may be used in the following areas:Computational biologyComputational photographyComputational physicsComputer-aided designComputer simulationDesignDigital artEducationGraphic designInfographicsInformation visualizationRational drug designScientific visualizationSpecial effects for cinemaVideo gamesVirtual realityWeb designComputer representation of surfacesGlossary of computer graphics1. The uncanny valley is a hypothesis in the field of robotics and 3D computer animation, whichholds that when human replicas look and act almost, but not perfectly, like actual humanbeings, it causes a response of revulsion among human observers. The concept "valley"refers to the dip in a graph of the comfort level of humans as a function of a robot's humanlikeness.
1. "ACM Computing Classification System ToC" (https://www.acm.org/about-acm/class).
www.acm.org. Retrieved 2020-04-28.
2. What is Computer Graphics? (http://www.graphics.cornell.edu/online/tutorial/), CornellUniversity Program of Computer Graphics. Last updated 04/15/98. Accessed November 17,2009.
ApplicationsSee alsoNotesReferences3. University of Leeds ISS (2002). "What are computer graphics?" (http://iss.leeds.ac.uk/info/306/giraphics/215/overview_of_computer_graphics/2) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150106160420/http://iss.leeds.ac.uk/info/306/giraphics/215/overview_of_computer_graphics/2) 2015-01-06 at the Wayback Machine. Last updated: 22 September 20084. Michael Friendly (2008). "Milestones in the history of thematic cartography, statisticalgraphics, and data visualization" (http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/milestone.pdf).
5. Ross on MIT TECH TV 1959 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ob9NV8mmm206. Carlson, Wayne (2003). "A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation" (https://web.archive.org/web/20070405172134/http://accad.osu.edu/~waynec/history/lesson2.html).
Archived from the original (http://accad.osu.edu/~waynec/history/lesson2.html) on April 5,2007.
7. Jon Peddie: The History of Visual Magic in Computers: How Beautiful Images are Made inCAD, 3D, VR and AR, Springer, 2013, p. 101, ISBN 978-14471493168. EDSAC 1 and after – a compilation of personal reminiscences (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/events/EDSAC99/reminiscences/#EDSAC%201%20people), Retrieved 11 July 2019.
9. David Salomon (1999). Computer graphics and geometric modeling. p. ix10. Peddie, Jon. "Famous Graphics Chips: NEC µPD7220 Graphics Display Controller – Thefirst graphics processor chip" (https://www.computer.org/publications/tech-news/chasing-pixels/famous-graphics-chips). IEEE Computer Society. Institute of Electrical and ElectronicsEngineers. Retrieved 1 November 2019.
11. Goldwasser, S.M. (June 1983). Computer Architecture For Interactive Display Of SegmentedImagery (https://books.google.com/books?id=8MuoCAAAQBAJ&pg=PA81). ComputerArchitectures for Spatially Distributed Data. Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 75–94(81). ISBN 9783642821509.
12. Peddie, Jon. "Famous Graphics Chips: TI TMS34010 and VRAM" (https://www.computer.org/publications/tech-news/chasing-pixels/Famous-Graphics-Chips-IBMs-professional-graphics-the-PGC-and-8514A/Famous-Graphics-Chips-TI-TMS34010-and-VRAM). IEEE ComputerSociety. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved 1 November 2019.
13. Peddie, Jon. "GPU History: Hitachi ARTC HD63484. The second graphics processor" (https://www.computer.org/publications/tech-news/chasing-pixels/gpu-history-hitachi-artc-hd63484). IEEE Computer Society. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved1 November 2019.
14. Information Processing Society of Japan. "LINKS-1 Computer Graphics System-ComputerMuseum" (http://museum.ipsj.or.jp/en/computer/other/0013.html). Retrieved 15 June 2015.
15. Defanti, Thomas A. (1984). "The Mass Impact of Videogame Technology" (http://www.vasulka.org/archive/Writings/VideogameImpact.pdf#page=29) (PDF). Advances in Computers. 23:121. doi:10.1016/S0065-2458(08)60463-5 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0065-2458%2808%2960463-5). ISBN 9780120121236. ISSN 0065-2458 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0065-2458). Retrieved 9 November 2022.
16. "System 16 – Namco System 21 Hardware (Namco)" (http://www.system16.com/hardware.php?id=536). Retrieved 15 June 2015.
17. "System 16 – Taito Air System Hardware (Taito)" (http://www.system16.com/hardware.php?id=656). Retrieved 15 June 2015.
18. "Virtua Racing – Arcade (1992)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225953/http://www.gamespot.com/gamespot/features/video/15influential/p13_01.html). 15 Most Influential Gamesof All Time. GameSpot. 14 March 2001. Archived from the original (http://www.gamespot.com/gamespot/features/video/15influential/p13_01.html) on 2010-04-12. Retrieved 19 January2014.
19. The Future Of Computer Graphics (http://www.danielsevo.com/hocg/hocg_2000.htm) DanielSevo, 2005 (retrieved 26 February 2015)20. Cinema: A Painstaking Fantasy (https://web.archive.org/web/20051121073232/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,997597,00.html) Chris Taylor, Time, 31 July 2000(retrieved 8 August 2012).
21. Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=finalfantasy.htm) at Box Office Mojo (retrieved 12 August 2012).
22. Greenberg, Ira (2007). Processing: Creative Coding and Computational Art (https://books.google.com/books?id=WTl_7H5HUZAC&pg=PA115). Apress. ISBN 978-1-59059-617-3.
23. Vincent, James (May 24, 2022). "All these images were generated by Google's latest text-to-image AI" (https://www.theverge.com/2022/5/24/23139297/google-imagen-text-to-image-ai-system-examples-paper). The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved May 28, 2022.
24. Graf, Rudolf F. (1999). Modern Dictionary of Electronics (https://books.google.com/books?id=o2I1JWPpdusC&q=pixel+intitle:%22Modern+Dictionary+of+Electronics%22+inauthor:graf&pg=PA569). Oxford, England: Newnes. p. 569. ISBN 0-7506-4331-5.
25. "Lighting principles for 3D artists from film and art" (https://garagefarm.net/blog/lighting-principles-for-3d-artists-from-film-and-art). GarageFarm. 2021-07-21. Retrieved 2021-07-21.
26. Blythe, David. Advanced Graphics Programming Techniques Using OpenGL (http://www.opengl.org/resources/code/samples/sig99/advanced99/notes/notes.html). Siggraph 1999. (see:Multitexture (http://www.opengl.org/resources/code/samples/sig99/advanced99/notes/node60.html))L. Ammeraal and K. Zhang (2007). Computer Graphics for Java Programmers, SecondEdition, John-Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-470-03160-5.
David Rogers (1998). Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics. McGraw-Hill.
James D. Foley, Andries Van Dam, Steven K. Feiner and John F. Hughes (1995). ComputerGraphics: Principles and Practice. Addison-Wesley.
Donald Hearn and M. Pauline Baker (1994). Computer Graphics. Prentice-Hall.
Francis S. Hill (2001). Computer Graphics. Prentice Hall.
John Lewell (1985). Computer Graphics: A Survey of Current Techniques and Applications.
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Jeffrey J. McConnell (2006). Computer Graphics: Theory Into Practice. Jones & BartlettPublishers.
R. D. Parslow, R. W. Prowse, Richard Elliot Green (1969). Computer Graphics: Techniquesand Applications.
Peter Shirley and others. (2005). Fundamentals of computer graphics. A.K. Peters, Ltd.
M. Slater, A. Steed, Y. Chrysantho (2002). Computer graphics and virtual environments: fromrealism to real-time. Addison-Wesley.
Wolfgang Höhl (2008): Interactive environments with open-source software, Springer WienNew York, ISBN 3-211-79169-8A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation (https://web.archive.org/web/20070405172134/http://accad.osu.edu/~waynec/history/lessons.html) (archived 5 April 2007)History of Computer Graphics series of articles (https://web.archive.org/web/20070302154206/http://hem.passagen.se/des/hocg/hocg_1960.htm) (archived 2 March 2007)Further readingExternal linksComputer Graphics research at UC Berkeley (http://graphics.berkeley.edu)Thomas Dreher: History of Computer Art, chap. IV.2 Computer Animation (http://iasl.uni-muenchen.de/links/GCA-IV.2e.html)History of Computer Graphics on RUS (https://zen.yandex.ru/id/5fe7a1db1a2c45667edf2471)Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_graphics&oldid=1134490972"