A simple illustration of public-key cryptography,one of the most widely used forms of encryptionEncryptionIn cryptography, encryption is the process of encodinginformation. This process converts the originalrepresentation of the information, known as plaintext,into an alternative form known as ciphertext. Ideally,only authorized parties can decipher a ciphertext backto plaintext and access the original information.
Encryption does not itself prevent interference butdenies the intelligible content to a would-be interceptor.
For technical reasons, an encryption scheme usuallyuses a pseudo-random encryption key generated by analgorithm. It is possible to decrypt the message without possessing the key but, for a well-designedencryption scheme, considerable computational resources and skills are required. An authorized recipientcan easily decrypt the message with the key provided by the originator to recipients but not to unauthorizedusers.
Historically, various forms of encryption have been used to aid in cryptography. Early encryptiontechniques were often used in military messaging. Since then, new techniques have emerged and becomecommonplace in all areas of modern computing.[1] Modern encryption schemes use the concepts of public-key and symmetric-key.[1] Modern encryption techniques ensure security because modern computers areinefficient at cracking the encryption.
One of the earliest forms of encryption is symbol replacement, which was first found in the tomb ofKhnumhotep II, who lived in 1900 BC Egypt. Symbol replacement encryption is “non-standard,” whichmeans that the symbols require a cipher or key to understand. This type of early encryption was usedthroughout Ancient Greece and Rome for military purposes.[2] One of the most famous military encryptiondevelopments was the Caesar Cipher, which was a system in which a letter in normal text is shifted down afixed number of positions down the alphabet to get the encoded letter. A message encoded with this type ofencryption could be decoded with the fixed number on the Caesar Cipher.[3]Around 800 AD, Arab mathematician Al-Kindi developed the technique of frequency analysis – which wasan attempt to systematically crack Caesar ciphers.[2] This technique looked at the frequency of letters in theencrypted message to determine the appropriate shift. This technique was rendered ineffective after thecreation of the Polyalphabetic cipher by Leone Alberti in 1465, which incorporated different sets oflanguages. In order for frequency analysis to be useful, the person trying to decrypt the message wouldneed to know which language the sender chose.[2]HistoryAncient19th–20th centuryAround 1790, Thomas Jefferson theorized a cipher to encode and decode messages in order to provide amore secure way of military correspondence. The cipher, known today as the Wheel Cipher or the JeffersonDisk, although never actually built, was theorized as a spool that could jumble an English message up to 36characters. The message could be decrypted by plugging in the jumbled message to a receiver with anidentical cipher.[4]A similar device to the Jefferson Disk, the M-94, was developed in 1917 independently by US Army MajorJoseph Mauborne. This device was used in U.S. military communications until 1942.[5]In World War II, the Axis powers used a more advanced version of the M-94 called the Enigma Machine.
The Enigma Machine was more complex because unlike the Jefferson Wheel and the M-94, each day thejumble of letters switched to a completely new combination. Each day's combination was only known bythe Axis, so many thought the only way to break the code would be to try over 17,000 combinations within24 hours.[6] The Allies used computing power to severely limit the number of reasonable combinations theyneeded to check every day, leading to the breaking of the Enigma Machine.
Today, encryption is used in the transfer of communication over the Internet for security and commerce.[1]As computing power continues to increase, computer encryption is constantly evolving to preventeavesdropping attacks.[7] With one of the first “modern” cipher suits, DES, utilizing a 56-bit key with72,057,594,037,927,936 possibilities being able to be cracked in 22 hours and 15 minutes by EFF’s DEScracker in 1999, which used a brute-force method of cracking. Modern encryption standards often usestronger key sizes often 256, like AES(256-bit mode), TwoFish, ChaCha20-Poly1305,Serpent(configurable up to 512-bit). Cipher suits utilizing a 128-bit or higher key, like AES, will not be ableto be brute-forced due to the total amount of keys of 3.4028237e+38 possibilities. The most likely optionfor cracking ciphers with high key size is to find vulnerabilities in the cipher itself, like inherent biases andbackdoors. For example, RC4, a stream cipher was cracked due to inherit biases and vulnerabilities in thecipher.
In the context of cryptography, encryption serves as a mechanism to ensure confidentiality.[1] Since datamay be visible on the Internet, sensitive information such as passwords and personal communication maybe exposed to potential interceptors.[1] The process of encrypting and decrypting messages involves keys.
The two main types of keys in cryptographic systems are symmetric-key and public-key (also known asasymmetric-key).[8][9]Many complex cryptographic algorithms often use simple modular arithmetic in their implementations.[10]In symmetric-key schemes,[11] the encryption and decryption keys are the same. Communicating partiesmust have the same key in order to achieve secure communication. The German Enigma Machine utilized anew symmetric-key each day for encoding and decoding messages.
In public-key encryption schemes, the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages.
However, only the receiving party has access to the decryption key that enables messages to be read.[12]Public-key encryption was first described in a secret document in 1973;[13] beforehand, all encryptionModernEncryption in cryptographyTypesschemes were symmetric-key (also called private-key).[14]: 478  Although published subsequently, the workof Diffie and Hellman was published in a journal with a large readership, and the value of the methodologywas explicitly described.[15] The method became known as the Diffie-Hellman key exchange.
RSA (Rivest–Shamir–Adleman) is another notable public-key cryptosystem. Created in 1978, it is still usedtoday for applications involving digital signatures.[16] Using number theory, the RSA algorithm selects twoprime numbers, which help generate both the encryption and decryption keys.[17]A publicly available public-key encryption application called Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) was written in1991 by Phil Zimmermann, and distributed free of charge with source code. PGP was purchased bySymantec in 2010 and is regularly updated.[18]Encryption has long been used by militaries and governments to facilitate secret communication. It is nowcommonly used in protecting information within many kinds of civilian systems. For example, theComputer Security Institute reported that in 2007, 71% of companies surveyed utilized encryption for someof their data in transit, and 53% utilized encryption for some of their data in storage.[19] Encryption can beused to protect data "at rest", such as information stored on computers and storage devices (e.g. USB flashdrives). In recent years, there have been numerous reports of confidential data, such as customers' personalrecords, being exposed through loss or theft of laptops or backup drives; encrypting such files at rest helpsprotect them if physical security measures fail.[20][21][22] Digital rights management systems, which preventunauthorized use or reproduction of copyrighted material and protect software against reverse engineering(see also copy protection), is another somewhat different example of using encryption on data at rest.[23]Encryption is also used to protect data in transit, for example data being transferred via networks (e.g. theInternet, e-commerce), mobile telephones, wireless microphones, wireless intercom systems, Bluetoothdevices and bank automatic teller machines. There have been numerous reports of data in transit beingintercepted in recent years.[24] Data should also be encrypted when transmitted across networks in order toprotect against eavesdropping of network traffic by unauthorized users.[25]Conventional methods for permanently deleting data from a storage device involve overwriting the device'swhole content with zeros, ones, or other patterns – a process which can take a significant amount of time,depending on the capacity and the type of storage medium. Cryptography offers a way of making theerasure almost instantaneous. This method is called crypto-shredding. An example implementation of thismethod can be found on iOS devices, where the cryptographic key is kept in a dedicated 'effaceablestorage'.[26] Because the key is stored on the same device, this setup on its own does not offer full privacyor security protection if an unauthorized person gains physical access to the device.
Encryption is used in the 21st century to protect digital data and information systems. As computing powerincreased over the years, encryption technology has only become more advanced and secure. However, thisadvancement in technology has also exposed a potential limitation of today's encryption methods.
The length of the encryption key is an indicator of the strength of the encryption method.[27] For example,the original encryption key, DES (Data Encryption Standard), was 56 bits, meaning it had 2^56combination possibilities. With today's computing power, a 56-bit key is no longer secure, being vulnerableUsesData erasureLimitationsto hacking by brute force attack.[28]Quantum computing utilizes properties of quantum mechanics in order to process large amounts of datasimultaneously. Quantum computing has been found to achieve computing speeds thousands of times fasterthan today's supercomputers.[29] This computing power presents a challenge to today's encryptiontechnology. For example, RSA encryption utilizes the multiplication of very large prime numbers to create asemiprime number for its public key. Decoding this key without its private key requires this semiprimenumber to be factored in, which can take a very long time to do with modern computers. It would take asupercomputer anywhere between weeks to months to factor in this key. However, quantum computing canuse quantum algorithms to factor this semiprime number in the same amount of time it takes for normalcomputers to generate it. This would make all data protected by current public-key encryption vulnerable toquantum computing attacks.[30] Other encryption techniques like elliptic curve cryptography and symmetrickey encryption are also vulnerable to quantum computing.
While quantum computing could be a threat to encryption security in the future, quantum computing as itcurrently stands is still very limited. Quantum computing currently is not commercially available, cannothandle large amounts of code, and only exists as computational devices, not computers.[31] Furthermore,quantum computing advancements will be able to be utilized in favor of encryption as well. The NationalSecurity Agency (NSA) is currently preparing post-quantum encryption standards for the future.[32]Quantum encryption promises a level of security that will be able to counter the threat of quantumcomputing.[31]Encryption is an important tool but is not sufficient alone to ensure the security or privacy of sensitiveinformation throughout its lifetime. Most applications of encryption protect information only at rest or intransit, leaving sensitive data in clear text and potentially vulnerable to improper disclosure duringprocessing, such as by a cloud service for example. Homomorphic encryption and secure multi-partycomputation are emerging techniques to compute on encrypted data; these techniques are general andTuring complete but incur high computational and/or communication costs.
In response to encryption of data at rest, cyber-adversaries have developed new types of attacks. Thesemore recent threats to encryption of data at rest include cryptographic attacks,[33] stolen ciphertextattacks,[34] attacks on encryption keys,[35] insider attacks, data corruption or integrity attacks,[36] datadestruction attacks, and ransomware attacks. Data fragmentation[37] and active defense[38] data protectiontechnologies attempt to counter some of these attacks, by distributing, moving, or mutating ciphertext so it ismore difficult to identify, steal, corrupt, or destroy.[39]The question of balancing the need for national security with the right to privacy has been debated foryears, since encryption has become critical in today's digital society. The modern encryption debate[40]started around the '90 when US government tried to ban cryptography because, according to them, it wouldthreaten national security. The debate is polarized around two opposing views. Those who see strongencryption as a problem making it easier for criminals to hide their illegal acts online and others who argueAttacks and countermeasuresThe debate around encryptionthat encryption keep digital communications safe. The debate heated up in 2014, when Big Tech like Appleand Google set encryption by default in their devices. This was the start of a series of controversies that putsgovernments, companies and internet users at stake.
Encryption, by itself, can protect the confidentiality of messages, but other techniques are still needed toprotect the integrity and authenticity of a message; for example, verification of a message authenticationcode (MAC) or a digital signature usually done by a hashing algorithm or a PGP signature. Authenticatedencryption algorithms are designed to provide both encryption and integrity protection together. Standardsfor cryptographic software and hardware to perform encryption are widely available, but successfully usingencryption to ensure security may be a challenging problem. A single error in system design or executioncan allow successful attacks. Sometimes an adversary can obtain unencrypted information without directlyundoing the encryption. See for example traffic analysis, TEMPEST, or Trojan horse.[41]Integrity protection mechanisms such as MACs and digital signatures must be applied to the ciphertextwhen it is first created, typically on the same device used to compose the message, to protect a messageend-to-end along its full transmission path; otherwise, any node between the sender and the encryptionagent could potentially tamper with it. Encrypting at the time of creation is only secure if the encryptiondevice itself has correct keys and has not been tampered with. If an endpoint device has been configured totrust a root certificate that an attacker controls, for example, then the attacker can both inspect and tamperwith encrypted data by performing a man-in-the-middle attack anywhere along the message's path. Thecommon practice of TLS interception by network operators represents a controlled and institutionallysanctioned form of such an attack, but countries have also attempted to employ such attacks as a form ofcontrol and censorship.[42]Even when encryption correctly hides a message's content and it cannot be tampered with at rest or intransit, a message's length is a form of metadata that can still leak sensitive information about the message.
For example, the well-known CRIME and BREACH attacks against HTTPS were side-channel attacksthat relied on information leakage via the length of encrypted content.[43] Traffic analysis is a broad class oftechniques that often employs message lengths to infer sensitive implementation about traffic flows byaggregating information about a large number of messages.
Padding a message's payload before encrypting it can help obscure the cleartext's true length, at the cost ofincreasing the ciphertext's size and introducing or increasing bandwidth overhead. Messages may bepadded randomly or deterministically, with each approach having different tradeoffs. Encrypting andpadding messages to form padded uniform random blobs or PURBs is a practice guaranteeing that thecipher text leaks no metadata about its cleartext's content, and leaks asymptotically minimal information via its length.[44]CryptosystemCold boot attackCyberspace Electronic Security Act (US)Dictionary attackDisk encryptionEncrypted functionExport of cryptographyGeo-blockingIndistinguishability obfuscationKey managementIntegrity protection of ciphertextsCiphertext length and paddingSee also