The probabilities of rolling severalnumbers using two dice.
ProbabilityProbability is the branch of mathematics concerning numericaldescriptions of how likely an event is to occur, or how likely itis that a proposition is true. The probability of an event is anumber between 0 and 1, where, roughly speaking, 0 indicatesimpossibility of the event and 1 indicates certainty.[note 1][1][2]The higher the probability of an event, the more likely it is thatthe event will occur. A simple example is the tossing of a fair(unbiased) coin. Since the coin is fair, the two outcomes("heads" and "tails") are both equally probable; the probabilityof "heads" equals the probability of "tails"; and since no otheroutcomes are possible, the probability of either "heads" or"tails" is 1/2 (which could also be written as 0.5 or 50%).
These concepts have been given an axiomatic mathematicalformalization in probability theory, which is used widely in areas of study such as statistics, mathematics,science, finance, gambling, artificial intelligence, machine learning, computer science, game theory, andphilosophy to, for example, draw inferences about the expected frequency of events. Probability theory isalso used to describe the underlying mechanics and regularities of complex systems.[3]When dealing with experiments that are random and well-defined in a purely theoretical setting (like tossinga coin), probabilities can be numerically described by the number of desired outcomes, divided by the totalnumber of all outcomes. For example, tossing a coin twice will yield "head-head", "head-tail", "tail-head",and "tail-tail" outcomes. The probability of getting an outcome of "head-head" is 1 out of 4 outcomes, or, innumerical terms, 1/4, 0.25 or 25%. However, when it comes to practical application, there are two majorcompeting categories of probability interpretations, whose adherents hold different views about thefundamental nature of probability:Objectivists assign numbers to describe some objective or physical state of affairs. The mostpopular version of objective probability is frequentist probability, which claims that theprobability of a random event denotes the relative frequency of occurrence of an experiment'soutcome when the experiment is repeated indefinitely. This interpretation considersprobability to be the relative frequency "in the long run" of outcomes.[4] A modification of thisis propensity probability, which interprets probability as the tendency of some experiment toyield a certain outcome, even if it is performed only once.
Subjectivists assign numbers per subjective probability, that is, as a degree of belief.[5] Thedegree of belief has been interpreted as "the price at which you would buy or sell a bet thatpays 1 unit of utility if E, 0 if not E",[6] although that interpretation is not universally agreedupon.[7] The most popular version of subjective probability is Bayesian probability, whichincludes expert knowledge as well as experimental data to produce probabilities. The expertknowledge is represented by some (subjective) prior probability distribution. These data areincorporated in a likelihood function. The product of the prior and the likelihood, whennormalized, results in a posterior probability distribution that incorporates all the informationknown to date.[8] By Aumann's agreement theorem, Bayesian agents whose prior beliefs areInterpretationsGerolamo Cardano(16th century)similar will end up with similar posterior beliefs. However, sufficiently different priors can leadto different conclusions, regardless of how much information the agents share.[9]The word probability derives from the Latin probabilitas, which can also mean "probity", a measure of theauthority of a witness in a legal case in Europe, and often correlated with the witness's nobility. In a sense,this differs much from the modern meaning of probability, which in contrast is a measure of the weight ofempirical evidence, and is arrived at from inductive reasoning and statistical inference.[10]The scientific study of probability is a modern development of mathematics. Gambling shows that there hasbeen an interest in quantifying the ideas of probability for millennia, but exact mathematical descriptionsarose much later. There are reasons for the slow development of the mathematics of probability. Whereasgames of chance provided the impetus for the mathematical study of probability, fundamental issues [note 2]are still obscured by the superstitions of gamblers.[11]According to Richard Jeffrey, "Before the middle of the seventeenth century, the term 'probable' (Latinprobabilis) meant approvable, and was applied in that sense, univocally, to opinion and to action. A probableaction or opinion was one such as sensible people would undertake or hold, in the circumstances."[12]However, in legal contexts especially, 'probable' could also apply to propositions for which there was goodevidence.[13]The sixteenth-century Italian polymath Gerolamo Cardano demonstrated theefficacy of defining odds as the ratio of favourable to unfavourable outcomes(which implies that the probability of an event is given by the ratio of favourableoutcomes to the total number of possible outcomes[14]). Aside from theelementary work by Cardano, the doctrine of probabilities dates to thecorrespondence of Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal (1654). ChristiaanHuygens (1657) gave the earliest known scientific treatment of the subject.[15]Jakob Bernoulli's Ars Conjectandi (posthumous, 1713) and Abraham de Moivre'sDoctrine of Chances (1718) treated the subject as a branch of mathematics.[16]See Ian Hacking's The Emergence of Probability[10] and James Franklin's TheScience of Conjecture[17] for histories of the early development of the veryconcept of mathematical probability.
The theory of errors may be traced back to Roger Cotes's Opera Miscellanea (posthumous, 1722), but amemoir prepared by Thomas Simpson in 1755 (printed 1756) first applied the theory to the discussion oferrors of observation.[18] The reprint (1757) of this memoir lays down the axioms that positive and negativeerrors are equally probable, and that certain assignable limits define the range of all errors. Simpson alsodiscusses continuous errors and describes a probability curve.
The first two laws of error that were proposed both originated with Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first law waspublished in 1774, and stated that the frequency of an error could be expressed as an exponential function ofthe numerical magnitude of the error—disregarding sign. The second law of error was proposed in 1778 byLaplace, and stated that the frequency of the error is an exponential function of the square of the error.[19]The second law of error is called the normal distribution or the Gauss law. "It is difficult historically toattribute that law to Gauss, who in spite of his well-known precocity had probably not made this discoverybefore he was two years old."[19]EtymologyHistoryChristiaan Huygenspublished one of thefirst books onprobability (17thcentury)Carl Friedrich GaussDaniel Bernoulli (1778) introduced the principle of the maximum product of theprobabilities of a system of concurrent errors.
Adrien-Marie Legendre (1805) developed the method of least squares, andintroduced it in his Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites descomètes (New Methods for Determining the Orbits of Comets).[20] In ignoranceof Legendre's contribution, an Irish-American writer, Robert Adrain, editor of"The Analyst" (1808), first deduced the law of facility of error,where  is a constant depending on precision of observation, and  is a scalefactor ensuring that the area under the curve equals 1. He gave two proofs, thesecond being essentially the same as John Herschel's (1850). Gauss gave the firstproof that seems to have been known in Europe (the third after Adrain's) in 1809.
Further proofs were given by Laplace (1810, 1812), Gauss (1823), James Ivory(1825, 1826), Hagen (1837), Friedrich Bessel (1838), W.F. Donkin (1844, 1856),and Morgan Crofton (1870). Other contributors were Ellis (1844), De Morgan(1864), Glaisher (1872), and Giovanni Schiaparelli (1875). Peters's (1856)formula for r, the probable error of a single observation, is well known.
In the nineteenth century, authors on the general theory included Laplace,Sylvestre Lacroix (1816), Littrow (1833), Adolphe Quetelet (1853), RichardDedekind (1860), Helmert (1872), Hermann Laurent (1873), Liagre, Didion andKarl Pearson. Augustus De Morgan and George Boole improved the expositionof the theory.
In 1906, Andrey Markov introduced[21] the notion of Markov chains, whichplayed an important role in stochastic processes theory and its applications. Themodern theory of probability based on the measure theory was developed by Andrey Kolmogorov in1931.[22]On the geometric side, contributors to The Educational Times included Miller, Crofton, McColl,Wolstenholme, Watson, and Artemas Martin.[23] See integral geometry for more information.
Like other theories, the theory of probability is a representation of its concepts in formal terms—that is, interms that can be considered separately from their meaning. These formal terms are manipulated by the rulesof mathematics and logic, and any results are interpreted or translated back into the problem domain.
There have been at least two successful attempts to formalize probability, namely the Kolmogorovformulation and the Cox formulation. In Kolmogorov's formulation (see also probability space), sets areinterpreted as events and probability as a measure on a class of sets. In Cox's theorem, probability is taken asa primitive (i.e., not further analyzed), and the emphasis is on constructing a consistent assignment ofprobability values to propositions. In both cases, the laws of probability are the same, except for technicaldetails.
TheoryCalculation of probability (risk) vsoddsThere are other methods for quantifying uncertainty, such as the Dempster–Shafer theory or possibilitytheory, but those are essentially different and not compatible with the usually-understood laws of probability.
Probability theory is applied in everyday life in risk assessment and modeling. The insurance industry andmarkets use actuarial science to determine pricing and make trading decisions. Governments applyprobabilistic methods in environmental regulation, entitlement analysis, and financial regulation.
An example of the use of probability theory in equity trading is the effect of the perceived probability of anywidespread Middle East conflict on oil prices, which have ripple effects in the economy as a whole. Anassessment by a commodity trader that a war is more likely can send that commodity's prices up or down,and signals other traders of that opinion. Accordingly, the probabilities are neither assessed independentlynor necessarily rationally. The theory of behavioral finance emerged to describe the effect of such groupthinkon pricing, on policy, and on peace and conflict.[24]In addition to financial assessment, probability can be used to analyze trends in biology (e.g., disease spread)as well as ecology (e.g., biological Punnett squares). As with finance, risk assessment can be used as astatistical tool to calculate the likelihood of undesirable events occurring, and can assist with implementingprotocols to avoid encountering such circumstances. Probability is used to design games of chance so thatcasinos can make a guaranteed profit, yet provide payouts to players that are frequent enough to encouragecontinued play.[25]Another significant application of probability theory in everyday life is reliability. Many consumer products,such as automobiles and consumer electronics, use reliability theory in product design to reduce theprobability of failure. Failure probability may influence a manufacturer's decisions on a product'swarranty.[26]The cache language model and other statistical language models that are used in natural language processingare also examples of applications of probability theory.
Consider an experiment that can produce a number of results. Thecollection of all possible results is called the sample space of theexperiment, sometimes denoted as . The power set of the samplespace is formed by considering all different collections of possibleresults. For example, rolling a die can produce six possible results.
One collection of possible results gives an odd number on the die.
Thus, the subset {1,3,5} is an element of the power set of the samplespace of dice rolls. These collections are called "events". In this case,{1,3,5} is the event that the die falls on some odd number. If theresults that actually occur fall in a given event, the event is said tohave occurred.
A probability is a way of assigning every event a value between zero and one, with the requirement that theevent made up of all possible results (in our example, the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}) is assigned a value of one. Toqualify as a probability, the assignment of values must satisfy the requirement that for any collection ofmutually exclusive events (events with no common results, such as the events {1,6}, {3}, and {2,4}), theprobability that at least one of the events will occur is given by the sum of the probabilities of all theindividual events.[27]ApplicationsMathematical treatmentThe probability of an event A is written as ,[28] , or .[29] This mathematical definition ofprobability can extend to infinite sample spaces, and even uncountable sample spaces, using the concept of ameasure.
The opposite or complement of an event A is the event [not A] (that is, the event of A not occurring), oftendenoted as , , or ; its probability is given by P(not A) = 1 − P(A).[30] As an example,the chance of not rolling a six on a six-sided die is 1 – (chance of rolling a six) . For a morecomprehensive treatment, see Complementary event.
If two events A and B occur on a single performance of an experiment, this is called the intersection or jointprobability of A and B, denoted as .
If two events, A and B are independent then the joint probability is[28]For example, if two coins are flipped, then the chance of both being heads is .[31]If either event A or event B can occur but never both simultaneously, then they are called mutually exclusiveevents.
If two events are mutually exclusive, then the probability of both occurring is denoted as  andIf two events are mutually exclusive, then the probability of either occurring is denoted as  andFor example, the chance of rolling a 1 or 2 on a six-sided die isIf the events are not mutually exclusive thenIndependent eventsMutually exclusive eventsNot mutually exclusive eventsFor example, when drawing a card from a deck of cards, the chance of getting a heart or a face card (J,Q,K)(or both) is , since among the 52 cards of a deck, 13 are hearts, 12 are face cards, and 3are both: here the possibilities included in the "3 that are both" are included in each of the "13 hearts" andthe "12 face cards", but should only be counted once.
Conditional probability is the probability of some event A, given the occurrence of some other event B.
Conditional probability is written , and is read "the probability of A, given B". It is defined by[32]If  then  is formally undefined by this expression. In this case  and  areindependent, since . However, it is possible to define a conditionalprobability for some zero-probability events using a σ-algebra of such events (such as those arising from acontinuous random variable).[33]For example, in a bag of 2 red balls and 2 blue balls (4 balls in total), the probability of taking a red ball is; however, when taking a second ball, the probability of it being either a red ball or a blue ball dependson the ball previously taken. For example, if a red ball was taken, then the probability of picking a red ballagain would be , since only 1 red and 2 blue balls would have been remaining. And if a blue ball wastaken previously, the probability of taking a red ball will be .
In probability theory and applications, Bayes' rule relates the odds of event  to event , before (prior to)and after (posterior to) conditioning on another event . The odds on  to event  is simply the ratio ofthe probabilities of the two events. When arbitrarily many events  are of interest, not just two, the rule canbe rephrased as posterior is proportional to prior times likelihood,  where theConditional probabilityInverse probabilityproportionality symbol means that the left hand side is proportional to (i.e., equals a constant times) the righthand side as  varies, for fixed or given  (Lee, 2012; Bertsch McGrayne, 2012). In this form it goes backto Laplace (1774) and to Cournot (1843); see Fienberg (2005). See Inverse probability and Bayes' rule.
Summary of probabilitiesEventProbabilityAnot AA or BA and BA given BIn a deterministic universe, based on Newtonian concepts, there would be no probability if all conditionswere known (Laplace's demon), (but there are situations in which sensitivity to initial conditions exceeds ourability to measure them, i.e. know them). In the case of a roulette wheel, if the force of the hand and theperiod of that force are known, the number on which the ball will stop would be a certainty (though as apractical matter, this would likely be true only of a roulette wheel that had not been exactly levelled – asThomas A. Bass' Newtonian Casino revealed). This also assumes knowledge of inertia and friction of thewheel, weight, smoothness, and roundness of the ball, variations in hand speed during the turning, and soforth. A probabilistic description can thus be more useful than Newtonian mechanics for analyzing thepattern of outcomes of repeated rolls of a roulette wheel. Physicists face the same situation in the kinetictheory of gases, where the system, while deterministic in principle, is so complex (with the number ofmolecules typically the order of magnitude of the Avogadro constant 6.02 ×1023) that only a statisticaldescription of its properties is feasible.
Probability theory is required to describe quantum phenomena.[34] A revolutionary discovery of early 20thcentury physics was the random character of all physical processes that occur at sub-atomic scales and aregoverned by the laws of quantum mechanics. The objective wave function evolves deterministically but,according to the Copenhagen interpretation, it deals with probabilities of observing, the outcome beingexplained by a wave function collapse when an observation is made. However, the loss of determinism forthe sake of instrumentalism did not meet with universal approval. Albert Einstein famously remarked in aletter to Max Born: "I am convinced that God does not play dice".[35] Like Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger,who discovered the wave function, believed quantum mechanics is a statistical approximation of anSummary of probabilitiesRelation to randomness and probability in quantum mechanics